[blog] Add blog post to announce the aggregation feature (#33595)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/aggregation-functions.md

```tsx
const firstAlphabeticalAggregation: GridAggregationFunction<string, string | null> =
  {
    apply: (params) => {
      if (params.values.length === 0) {
        return null;
      }
      const sortedValue = params.values.sort((a = '', b = '') => a.localeCompare(b));
      return sortedValue[0];
    },
    // The `label` defines what's displayed in the column header when this aggregation is active.
    label: 'First Alphabetical',
    // The `types` property defines which type of columns can use this aggregation function.
    // Here, we only want to propose this aggregation function for `string` columns.
    // If not defined, aggregation will be available for all column types.
    columnTypes: ['string'],
  };
```

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/with-custom-functions.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

## Okay, I’m in! How can I get started?

:::info

> First make sure that you're using `@mui/x-data-grid-premium` and version `5.15` or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First make sure that you're using `@mui/x-data-grid-premium` and version `5.15.0` or later.
```
to be precise

:::

> During the initil version of Aggregation functions, we’re publishing the feature as experimental, so we have some room to validate its API and the overall direction we’re taking with it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the initial version of Aggregation functions, we’re publishing the feature as experimental, so we have some room to validate its API and the overall direction we’re taking with it.
```

But the feature is stable, and the API will likely not change significantly.

To activate the feature, please enabled it with the experimentalFeatures prop.

```tsx
<DataGridPremium experimentalFeatures={{ aggregation: true }} {...otherProps} />
```

And that's it! That enables the aggregation option on the column menu (available by default on columns of type number and string).

## Use with tree data and more

We already mentioned that you could customize functions and use aggregation with row grouping. But there are a lot of other possibilities to explore!

Please check out the feature’s [full documentation](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/) to get a better overview of everything it has to offer.

> ## Row pinning

Reviewer: I've moved row pinning from the callout to a separate paragraph. I'll add the video later

Author: Nice improvement, @cherniavskii!

Aggregation footer row is empowered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
It enables you to pin rows at the bottom or at the top of your data grid.
Pinned rows are visible at all times while user scrolls the grid vertically.

> TODO: add video

> Row pinning feature is available in Data grid Pro and Premium.

Author: ```suggestion
Row pinning is available in Data grid Pro and Premium.
```

Check out more details on [its documentation](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning) page.

## Share your feedback 🗣

**And if you’re feeling generous, we’re recruiting users to interview!**

> We hope you’re excited with aggregation functions as we are!

Author: ```suggestion
We hope you’re excited about the new features as we are!
```

---
title: Aggregate data like in Excel, but easier!
description: Introducing aggregation functions and summary rows in Data grid Premium.
date: 2022-07-31T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['josefreitas', 'flaviendelangle', 'cherniavskii']
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
card: true
---

If you ever had a lot of data on a grid, you probably know that the ability to set different perspectives on data is essential to help users extract information. Typically, one would use at least filtering or sorting, but that barely scratches the surface of what one could do.

> The Data grid Premium is all about enabling and empowering advanced use cases for data analysis. And in that spirit, we’re overjoyed to announce that starting from [v5.15](changelog-link), you can now use [aggregation functions](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/), and with a couple of clicks, extract information like **sum**, **average**, **count**, and others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Data grid Premium is all about enabling and empowering advanced use cases for data analysis. And in that spirit, we’re overjoyed to announce that starting from [v5.15.0](changelog-link), you can now use [aggregation functions](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/), and with a couple of clicks, extract information like **sum**, **average**, **count**, and others.
```

But the feature is stable, and the API will likely not change significantly.

To activate the feature, please enabled it with the experimentalFeatures prop.

```tsx
<DataGridPremium experimentalFeatures={{ aggregation: true }} {...otherProps} />
```

And that's it! That enables the aggregation option on the column menu (available by default on columns of type number and string).

## Use with tree data and more

We already mentioned that you could customize functions and use aggregation with row grouping. But there are a lot of other possibilities to explore!

Please check out the feature’s [full documentation](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/) to get a better overview of everything it has to offer.

## Row pinning

Aggregation footer row is empowered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
It enables you to pin rows at the bottom or at the top of your data grid.
Pinned rows are visible at all times while user scrolls the grid vertically.

> TODO: add video

Row pinning is available in Data grid Pro and Premium.

> Check out more details on [its documentation](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out more details on its [documentation page](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
```

---
title: Aggregate data like in Excel, but easier!
description: Introducing aggregation functions and summary rows in Data grid Premium.

> date: 2022-07-31T00:00:00.000Z

Reviewer 2: It's a sunday?

Author: Updated.

authors: ['josefreitas', 'flaviendelangle', 'cherniavskii']
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']

> card: true

Reviewer 2: We say there is a card, but there is none in the filesystem.

---

If you ever had a lot of data on a grid, you probably know that the ability to set different perspectives on data is essential to help users extract information. Typically, one would use at least filtering or sorting, but that barely scratches the surface of what one could do.

The Data grid Premium is all about enabling and empowering advanced use cases for data analysis.

> And in that spirit, we’re overjoyed to announce that starting from [v5.15.0](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#5150), you can now use [aggregation functions](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/), and with a couple of clicks, extract information like **sum**, **average**, **count**, and others.

Reviewer: Maybe link to GitHub release page instead?

```suggestion
And in that spirit, we’re overjoyed to announce that starting from [v5.15.0](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v5.15.0), you can now use [aggregation functions](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/), and with a couple of clicks, extract information like **sum**, **average**, **count**, and others.
```

To make all that work well together, we took to the heart that we’d need to bring and focus on the best end-user experience possible, enabling the majority of use cases out of the box to the end-user, without any significant need for customization.

How easy can it be to get the average of transactions per user?

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/with-row-grouping.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

## Customize everything

The out-of-the-box experience is very important to us, but as is the ability to customize and extend the feature to your own use case.

You can change the styles of every element involved, set automatic aggregations, choose which columns can be aggregated by which functions, and even create your own custom function, like in the example below, where we created a function to get the first value in alphabetical order.

```tsx

> const firstAlphabeticalAggregation: GridAggregationFunction<string, string | null> =

Reviewer 2: Could we prettify this demo so there is no horizontal scrollbar?

<img width="711" alt="Screenshot 2022-07-25 at 18 08 18" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/180824615-38161f67-b7a5-471d-9a63-e1b9115d4691.png">

Reviewer 2: Now, to make this happen, we would need:

```diff
diff --git a/docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.md b/docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.md
index 151a906b27..ef430c0146 100644
--- a/docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.md
+++ b/docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v5.md
@@ -129,7 +129,9 @@ const GridToolbarContainerStyled = styled(GridToolbarContainer)({
 });

 function MyCustomToolbar() {
-  return <GridToolbarContainerStyled>My custom toolbar</GridToolbarContainerStyled>;
+  return (
+    <GridToolbarContainerStyled>My custom toolbar</GridToolbarContainerStyled>
+  );
 }

 export default function App() {
diff --git a/prettier.config.js b/prettier.config.js
index 44d221920b..47f13bd576 100644
--- a/prettier.config.js
+++ b/prettier.config.js
@@ -10,5 +10,12 @@ module.exports = {
         printWidth: 85,
       },
     },
+    {
+      files: ['docs/pages/blog/**/*.md'],
+      options: {
+        // otherwise code blocks overflow on the docs website
+        printWidth: 82,
+      },
+    },
   ],
 };
```

Author: Thanks for diving there!
I'll copy your prettified version from this PR. We can open a new one for the prettier.config update.

Author: PR to address prettier config update: https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/33648

  {
    apply: (params) => {
      if (params.values.length === 0) {
        return null;
      }
      const sortedValue = params.values.sort((a = '', b = '') => a.localeCompare(b));
      return sortedValue[0];
    },
    // The `label` defines what's displayed in the column header when this aggregation is active.
    label: 'First Alphabetical',
    // The `types` property defines which type of columns can use this aggregation function.
    // Here, we only want to propose this aggregation function for `string` columns.
    // If not defined, aggregation will be available for all column types.
    columnTypes: ['string'],
  };
```

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/with-custom-functions.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

## Okay, I’m in! How can I get started?

:::info
First make sure that you're using `@mui/x-data-grid-premium` and version `5.15.0` or later.

> 

Reviewer 2: No needed

```suggestion
```

Please check out the feature’s [full documentation](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/) to get a better overview of everything it has to offer.

## Row pinning

Aggregation footer row is empowered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
It enables you to pin rows at the bottom or at the top of your data grid.
Pinned rows are visible at all times while user scrolls the grid vertically.

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/row-pinning.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

Row pinning is available in Data grid Pro and Premium.

Check out more details on its [documentation page](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).

## Share your feedback 🗣

**And if you’re feeling generous, we’re recruiting users to interview!**

We hope you’re excited about the new features as we are!

As usual, we’re glad to listen to any feedback. Please feel free to open new issues to report bugs or suggest improvements.

Moreover, we’re planning the MUI X v6 release, and we’d love to hear more about your pain points and use cases.

> If you want to help us steer our product, please consider [contacting us](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) to schedule a 30 minutes user interview session.

Reviewer 2: The header looks strange, I thought it was an overlay bug at first

<img width="661" alt="Screenshot 2022-07-25 at 18 26 02" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3165635/180827817-7126b1b0-ca3f-45f6-9064-1e6d542a5859.png">

Reviewer 2: Could you share the Google form with all@mui.com? It doesn't seem that I have access

Author: @oliviertassinari, you should have access now.
I've reverted the changes to the header image. I did a couple of experiments, but I wasn't sure about the result either.

---

> title: Aggregate data like in Excel, but easier!

Reviewer 3: I don't really like using words like "easy" and "simple" to describe things like this. Maybe we can approach this from a different angle.

```suggestion
title: Give users the power to intuitively aggregate data for more robust analysis
```

Author: I understand the argument about not using easy and simple in documentation, but this "easier" is not the same case I'd say

> description: Introducing aggregation functions and summary rows in Data grid Premium.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Aggregation functions and summary rows are now available in the MUI X Premium Data Grid.
```

date: 2022-08-01T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['josefreitas', 'flaviendelangle', 'cherniavskii']
tags: ['MUI X', 'News']
card: false
---

If you ever had a lot of data on a grid, you probably know that the ability to set different perspectives on data is essential to help users extract information. Typically, one would use at least filtering or sorting, but that barely scratches the surface of what one could do.

The Data grid Premium is all about enabling and empowering advanced use cases for data analysis.
And in that spirit, we’re overjoyed to announce that starting from [v5.15.0](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v5.15.0), you can now use [aggregation functions](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/), and with a couple of clicks, extract information like **sum**, **average**, **count**, and others.

> ## Wait, what is an aggregation function?

Reviewer 3: This article uses two different styles of headers: some are styled as the reader asking questions, while others simply describe the respective section. I would suggest writing them all in the latter style for consistency.

```suggestion
## What are aggregation functions?
```

Author: I understand the argument of style consistency, but I think it's harmless in this case, and both headers using this focus on genuine questions users are likely to make.

In a nutshell, those are functions used to return a computed result based on the values of a given column. For example, you have a list of financial transactions, and you want to get the Sum of all transactions and display it in a summary row.

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/summary-row.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

> ## High end-user experience

Reviewer 3: To get more descriptive:

```suggestion
## Intuitive end-user experience
```

> The **Sum** function showing a `Total` in summary rows is probably one of the most common use cases. But users can employ multiple aggregation functions in different columns simultaneously, and even combine with row grouping to aggregate children’s data on each group.

Reviewer 3: Couple tiny style changes here. Also, is there another way to say "aggregate children's data on each group"? It's not entirely clear to me what this means.

```suggestion
The **Sum** function showing a **Total** in summary rows is one of the most common use cases. But users can employ multiple aggregation functions in different columns simultaneously, and even combine with row grouping to aggregate children’s data on each group.
```

> To make all that work well together, we took to the heart that we’d need to bring and focus on the best end-user experience possible, enabling the majority of use cases out of the box to the end-user, without any significant need for customization.

Reviewer 3: To ["take (something) to heart"](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/take%20(something)%20to%20heart) implies that that thing upsets you. I think what we're trying to say here is more about describing the primary focus/goal/vision for this feature.

```suggestion
To make all that work well together, we knew that the focus had to be on creating the best end-user experience possible. The goal was to enable the majority of use cases right out of the box, without any need for significant customization.
```

How easy can it be to get the average of transactions per user?

> 

Reviewer 3: To lead into the video more explicitly.

```suggestion
Check out the video below to see it in action:

```

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/with-row-grouping.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

## Customize everything

> The out-of-the-box experience is very important to us, but as is the ability to customize and extend the feature to your own use case.

Reviewer 3: This line can be cut as it's largely redundant.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: If not cut, here's how to improve the grammar:

```suggestion
The out-of-the-box experience is very important to us, but equally important is the ability to customize and extend the feature to suit your own use case.
```

> You can change the styles of every element involved, set automatic aggregations, choose which columns can be aggregated by which functions, and even create your own custom function, like in the example below, where we created a function to get the first value in alphabetical order.

Reviewer 3: Split up this run-on sentence.

```suggestion
You can change the styles of every element involved, set automatic aggregations, choose which columns can be aggregated by which functions, and even create your own custom functions.
In the example below, we created a function to get the first value in alphabetical order:
```

```ts
const firstAlphabeticalAggregation: GridAggregationFunction<string, string | null> =
  {
    apply: (params) => {
      if (params.values.length === 0) {
        return null;
      }
      const sortedValue = params.values.sort((a = '', b = '') => a.localeCompare(b));
      return sortedValue[0];
    },
    // The `label` defines what's displayed in the column header when this
    // aggregation is active.
    label: 'First Alphabetical',
    // The `types` property defines which type of columns can use this
    // aggregation function. Here, we only want to propose this aggregation
    // function for `string` columns. If not defined, aggregation will be
    // available for all column types.
    columnTypes: ['string'],
  };
```

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/with-custom-functions.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

> ## Okay, I’m in! How can I get started?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How to enable aggregation functions
```

Author: see: https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/33595/files#r930710157

> :::info
> First make sure that you're using `@mui/x-data-grid-premium` and version `5.15.0` or later.
> :::

Reviewer 3: I don't think the callout is really necessary here.

```suggestion
Aggregation functions are available in `@mui/x-data-grid-premium`, version `5.15.0` or later.
```

> During the initial version of Aggregation functions, we’re publishing the feature as experimental, so we have some room to validate its API and the overall direction we’re taking with it.
> But the feature is stable, and the API will likely not change significantly.

Reviewer 3: To get to the point more directly.

```suggestion
This feature is currently considered experimental as we continue to validate its API and refine our goals for it.
But it is stable, and the API most likely will not change significantly.
```

> To activate the feature, please enabled it with the experimentalFeatures prop.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can activate the feature with the `experimentalFeatures` prop:
```

```tsx
<DataGridPremium experimentalFeatures={{ aggregation: true }} {...otherProps} />
```

> And that's it! That enables the aggregation option on the column menu (available by default on columns of type number and string).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And that's it! That enables the **Aggregation** option on the column menu, which is available by default on columns of type number and string.
```

## Use with tree data and more

We already mentioned that you could customize functions and use aggregation with row grouping. But there are a lot of other possibilities to explore!

Please check out the feature’s [full documentation](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/) to get a better overview of everything it has to offer.

## Row pinning

> Aggregation footer row is empowered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).

Reviewer 3: What does "empowered" mean in this context? "Made possible by"? In that case, I'd just say "powered."

```suggestion
The Aggregation footer row is powered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
```

> It enables you to pin rows at the bottom or at the top of your data grid.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It enables you to pin rows to the top or bottom of your data grid.
```

> Pinned rows are visible at all times while user scrolls the grid vertically.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pinned rows are visible at all times while the user scrolls the grid vertically.
```

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/row-pinning.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

> Row pinning is available in Data grid Pro and Premium.

Reviewer 3: This is another example of awkward mixed cases and non-English standard grammar.

```suggestion
Row pinning is available in the Pro and Premium Data Grids.
```

> Check out more details on its [documentation page](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).

Reviewer 3: To be more descriptive.

```suggestion
Check out more details in the [Row pinning documentation](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
```

## Share your feedback 🗣

> **And if you’re feeling generous, we’re recruiting users to interview!**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**If you’re feeling generous, we’re recruiting users to interview!**
```

We hope you’re excited about the new features as we are!

> As usual, we’re glad to listen to any feedback. Please feel free to open new issues to report bugs or suggest improvements.

Reviewer 3: To be more direct and address the reader.

```suggestion
As always, we’re happy to hear from you. 
Please feel free to open new issues to report bugs or suggest improvements.
```

> Moreover, we’re planning the MUI X v6 release, and we’d love to hear more about your pain points and use cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We’re currently in the process of planning MUI X v6, and we’d love to hear more about your pain points and use cases.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Moreover, we’re planning MUI X v6, and we’d love to hear more about your pain points and use cases.
```

> If you want to help us steer our product, please consider [contacting us](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) to schedule a 30 minutes user interview session.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to help steer the direction of our products, please consider [contacting us](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) to schedule a 30-minute user interview session.
```

Please check out the feature’s [full documentation](/x/react-data-grid/aggregation/) to get a better overview of everything it has to offer.

## Row pinning

The Aggregation footer row is powered by another new feature called [Row pinning](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).
It enables you to pin rows to the top or bottom of your data grid.
Pinned rows are visible at all times while the user scrolls the grid vertically.

<video style="margin-bottom: 24px;" autoplay muted loop playsinline controls>
  <source src="/static/blog/aggregation-functions/row-pinning.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
</video>

Row pinning is available in the Pro and Premium Data Grids.

Check out more details in the [Row pinning documentation](/x/react-data-grid/rows/#row-pinning).

## Share your feedback 🗣

**And if you’re feeling generous, we’re recruiting users to interview!**

We hope you’re excited about the new features as we are!

As always, we’re happy to hear from you.
Please feel free to open new issues to report bugs or suggest improvements.

Moreover, we’re planning MUI X v6, and we’d love to hear more about your pain points and use cases.

> If you want to help steer the direction of our products, please consider [contacting us](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) to schedule a 30-minute user interview session.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to help steer the direction of our components, please consider [contacting us](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A) to schedule a 30-minute user interview session.
```
